to see Mrs. Johnson, and she asked for my grade records again, and they were pretty good, both the first two quarters, and so she said, all right.
She gave me a slip.
She said, you report over to Dr. Mickle, the head of entomology.
and he'll assign you a job.
She looked through her records about where the request for student help, excuse me.
I went over to see Dr. Mikkel, and there's interesting small world bits that come up in this too.
And he put me to working up in the insect museum.
cutting labels and pinning up insects.
And I was assigned mostly to work for graduate student Clarence Hoffman, who was working on, I can even remember the name of the insect, Neodyprion bank siena, which is a sawfly of jack pine.
She was doing a dissertation on that?
Yes, and he was getting fairly well along towards
towards finishing his doctor.
So, I worked with him that spring semester, and there was another young student in the same shape as I, but he was an undergraduate in animology, Richard Dagge, whom I met in the most unlikely place about
I suppose 35 years later, over in the Mediterranean, I guess I was in, it wasn't Rhodes, Muscatinian Cyprus.
I was looking at their wheat problems, their germ wheat, and I came in one Saturday afternoon into the hotel and it was hot and I went in to get a Coca-Cola, turned into the
little bar and I nearly ran into this same man, Richard Dagey, who was then the director of the largest hospital, I suppose the only big one, in Saudi Arabia.
He had finished entomology, went through during this period, then took
medical entomology in graduate school, public health degree at John Hopkins or MIT, I'm not sure which, and he had ended up on mosquito and malaria control over there, and so here was the small world that shrunk and I ran into him.
This must have been in about 1960.
A lot of water had gone under the bridge.
But when we turned the corner, I called him by name.
I had never seen him since he was 35 or 37, maybe.
And he called me by name.
It was curious.
I guess we suffered next to each other long enough so that we learned to know each other well.
There's another sequel to this.
Well, I'm getting too far.
Shall I tie this one in?
Clarence Hoffman, the next time I saw him, when I got all tangled up into this environmental issue business on DDT and malaria and all of the other diseases that are of tremendous importance in tropical countries, this must have been in 19...
Because right after, when I was getting ready to, I was preparing the McDougal lecture.
I don't know if you've ever seen this.
It got to be a hot issue.
This is a memorial lecture that's given at each opening of the Food and Agriculture Organization sessions.
And in 1971, I was invited to give this.
And so I was digging up data.
I wanted to see Dr. Nippling, who was the head of entomology at the USDA.
And I had the appointment at Palsdale to see him.
And I arrived, I guess I arrived a little earlier, he was held up.
And so the secretary ushered me in to see his deputy, and I could see his name written on his plaque on his desk.
Clarence Hoffman.
And so I took a stuck a needle and I said, how are the Neodiprian panxianus getting along?
He hadn't worked, of course, in forest entomology for a long time.
He'd gone into more general entomology and he sort of looked in a bewildered way as to what in the devil was this guy asking such a ridiculous question about.
Finally I said, you don't remember me, but I was an undergraduate that pinned up most of your insect collection back in 1934.
Well, going back to the NYA, then the second year I guess I
I worked in entomology also, but for another professor, Alex Hodson, and he was working on defoliation studies and the effect of defoliation on tree long survival.
mostly forest tent caterpillar, but he had lots of data with different degrees of defoliation and some artificially defoliated by hand that we did to give effects over several years time, much later.
So I worked with him, helped him on these data.
He later became the head of the Department of Entomology there.
He's retired four or five years ago, Alex Hodson.
The third year, I worked down in veterinary medicine for Dr. Boyd, took care of the guinea pigs, all the experimental animals, and I guess the fourth year I didn't have to work because by then I was, I had dropped out and worked for
service and had a little money and so I could survive without that.
And maybe even NYA was being discontinued by then, I don't remember.
Did you perceive NYA as, you know this is, the new deal was the first time and
in which the government is directly a number of people in a society.
Did you perceive this as a government handout, which is some of the criticism at the time, or make work projects?
Or did you feel that you were working for the University of Minnesota more than for the government in a responsible fashion?
Yes, I do because of the fact that these programs that we were working on were related to the research programs that the professors were carrying on.
They weren't something else that were added.
I think what in effect happened was that by getting student aid like this they could carry more research and probably do a
better job of it.
I never felt that this was just a handout, nor did I feel that way about the Civilian Conservation Corps, you see.
Which we're going to get to.
Because they had similar aspects, and the WPA.
Yeah, okay.
This is sort of a forerunner for like work-study program that we have on campus today.
which is an LBJ program.
Did you, because you were in this type of a program back in the 1930s, since that time, have you supported government aid to students?
Yes.
Of course, I've been far removed from being outside the country, but basically, I think it's a good investment for the future.
And I think that this was well handled back in the 30s.
I would assume that it still is today.
I mean, you have to keep a certain academic record or you're out.
That's still the way it is, I assume, right?
You have to keep a certain level of academic excellence or you lose your system.
The CCC came along, and in the summer of my, let's see, sophomore year, must have been 35, I had a chance to, I wrote 50 or more letters to all the regional offices of the Forest Service and to the forest experiment stations all over the country.
I was one of the few undergraduates, because it was the number that went out, that got a summer job in 35, at least a sophomore.
That was very rare, juniors and seniors, yes, but I had a chance to go to the
Northeastern Forest Experiment Station.
The headquarters at that time were in New Haven, Connecticut.
Since then they've been two regions put together and they're in Philadelphia.
And I was sent to the Hopkins Experimental Forest, which was being organized.
This was land that was taken over, given, I suppose, to the government.
It was part of the old hill, the railroad magnate's estate.
Tremendous old buildings in the foot of the Berkshire.
Well, it's right near Mount Greylock, just on the edge of Williamstown.
Today, this is the environmental and botanical garden, I guess they call it, of Williams College.
I've forgotten the exact title, but anyway, about 10 or 12 years ago,
This property was passed over, it was closed out as a forest experiment station that became a part of the biology department of Williams College.
Well, I ran the boundary survey on this, took the forest inventory plots and laid out the plots where Dr. Ernie Schreiner was beginning his rather big program
on genetic improvement of asthma, poplar.
Really?
Is this the first time that you've dealt with any issues dealing with genetics?
Yes.
And is this what was one of the main stimulants?
Well, he was just getting going on this.
There's some interesting things there also, how small the world is.
and how many cross ties I learned from these early experiences.
While I was there, and had this pretty well along all the mapping, it was a detailed map, both vegetation and border lines, the old topographic map, and I guess I was about three quarters done.
I stayed
I not only worked that summer, I stayed out of school, so I'd get a little money together.
I lived right there on the station with all kinds of houses.
They weren't fixed up, old ones, cold and miserable, but livable.
So I lived there with the family.
I ate with my boss, who was a civil engineer, was directly in charge of this, but he was not a forester, but he had been named interim
manager, Bart, not Bart, Boxstar.
That was the nickname.
I don't even remember his true name.
Anyway, he was a civil engineer, and so he left most of the forestry work to me.
One day I got a wire saying from the New Haven office, we're sending up another man to join your crew.
He's Merlin B. Dickerman.
He just got his master's degree from University of California, Forest Economics.
God, I thought, now here I am, a sophomore.
I'm gonna have this guy on my crew and I'll really have trouble.
But it turned out that he was a wonderful guy and we established friendship and all down through the years he became the
deputy chief of the Forest Service eventually before he retired about four years ago and in charge of research.
We maintained contact all of that time.
He later moved as a director of research or director of the Rocky Mountain, Northern Rocky Mountain Forest Experiment Station and then subsequently to the Lake State.
Forest Experiment Station on the campus of Minnesota, and then up to the deputy chief, and there too was a funny lingering tide that had importance.
He came down to Mexico on a committee meeting in 19, oh I guess, 1968 or so.
But meanwhile, we'd been in contact all along, all over the years.
As a matter of fact, he tried to convince me to leave wheat breeding and become a forest tree breeder a couple of times.
And I was inclined, but never made the shift.
But as a result of this, we used to talk about these things, and he'd invite me sometimes to the forest genetics meetings, EUFRO, which is the United EU,
Anyways, the International Union of Forest Tree Breeders.
First time I went, this is interesting too, first time I went was at Penn State, maybe in 64 or 5, and I was talking about the
incorporating and breeding and maintaining disease resistance in important crop species or forest trees.
And as I was introduced, the Chancellor at Penn State, who was an undergraduate classmate, started out in forestry in Minnesota, but then had changed to horticulture.
He introduced me, I'll come up with his name in a second, Larson, Russ Larson, but he didn't mention that I was a forester, really.
By then I had gained a certain amount of notoriety in wheat, so this never came out in the introduction.
So as I stepped up to the podium, I looked around and I see Ernie Schreiner down here, the guy that I used to, I laid out his first plots for.
And I saw Carl Hartley, who was the chief forest pathologist for the USDA, for the Forest Service.
They're sitting together right down in front.
And so I started out my comments and I said, you know,
It's kind of frightening.
I've been away from forestry so long that even my two former chiefs don't recognize
Ernie, I was the same person that laid out your first plots for your forest genetics, your aspen breeding plots, and Carl, I used to talk to you about the disasters of losing our American chestnut, the chestnut blight, and here you don't even recognize me.
Schreiner is a sort of an emotional person.
He jumped up in the
front of this auditorium and he says, damn you, Norm.
He says, I thought that was an entirely different name.
I'd seen it, Borlaug, but it never rang a bell.
So that's how small the world is.
Going back the other way about Dickerman, when he came down to Mexico, he was serving on a joint Canadian-Mexican-USA for planning of some international force to
foresters meeting.
This was in 68.
And so I loaned them an office car to make some trips around and have a look at some forestry thing.
I was tied up so that I couldn't go.
When he came back, he spent two days out at our research center and he said, look,
He said, I see all of these young people around here that you're training from all over the world in genetics, plant breeding, in agronomy, which would be like silviculture to us, in all of the interrelated disciplines, forest pathology or plant pathology and entomology, and we don't have any practical courses like this, he said.
Our people are very theoretical when it comes to forest genetics.
They learn it from a book and have a little time with a professor who's carrying on a very modest program, but do you think that we could work out something that might be useful?
I said, well, I don't know.
So we talked about it and now I guess we've had five of those
meetings.
The way it worked out was that at no expense to CIMA International Mason Wheat Center, it was agreed by the directors of CIMA and the Forest Service originally that we could accept up to five, I guess at one time it went up to six or seven, five young forest geneticists
forest breeders, call them what you will, or forest pathologists interested in breeding.
They would pay their own expense, live in our quarters, travel with our people for a month.
They would spend, and I laid out how I thought it should be, three weeks of that.
period, with the corn program, because we were using a recurrent selection type of breeding program, which is precisely what you have to use in forestry.
In the last week, they would spend it with our wheat and barley and triticale program, where it's just the opposite.
It's self-pollinated crop plants.
They're vulnerable to diseases more than the forest trees, although both have problems.
And then we would have one day where we'd bring in all our senior staff.
They would present in the morning a brief synopsis of their program that they were doing back home in the U.S.
forestry.
And we would have questions and answers.
And it turned out to be a wonderful program because of the fact, you see, I used to chair those in the early times.
I would say after they'd made their presentations, I would say to our head wheat breeder who never thought about trees, I said, Raja, Raja Ram, we have tough time keeping rust resistance in our varieties for five at the most ten years.
Now, these people are confronted with the problem of incorporating, let's say, rust resistance into this pine species
that will not be harvested for 50 to 60 years, maybe 80.
How would you approach that if you were given that job?
Their eyes bug out, you know, because they've been thinking in short terms and annual crops, and you can go through a generation, two generations a year.
You can't do this in forest trees, so you've got to rethink your whole thing.
On the other hand, the foresters,
when they'd see the shortcuts that were being taken and the close linkage between our, let's say, breeding for maize or corn quality, nutritive quality, between our biochemistry laboratory and the geneticists out in our plots, they got insights into lots of things that they would never have had before.
To make a long story short,
We've had these every second year.
I guess we've had five of those up to now.
Yes, it's been expanded a bit in that last time we had Canadian.
There's a growing demand for this, but we can't do this if we bring too many then to become a burden to our own corn breeders, our own wheat breeders, but it's a good
mix so you see way back in that forestry thing there's some funny things that have happened and how they're all tied up i think for good yeah for not one country but for many countries now let's get back to cccs and let's get back to your to the experiments that you did what what were you doing uh on that plot the forest and and what were your aims and what were your accomplishments well at that time i was not
nothing more than a technician.
I was a young forester who was, as I said, mapped this, made an inventory of all the vegetation, picked out the areas where we thought the plots should be located, staked them out, and that was about where it was when I left to go back to school.
Shriner came down a couple of times and talked about where these should go and the general planning, but I never was directly involved in this.
This was probably your first time working in the field, wasn't it?
In forestry, yes.
And being your first time, did it confirm your interest in forestry or did it raise doubts that you wanted to be a forester?
No, it intrigued me greatly.
and I think probably one of the things that left the greatest impact on me was that in that area the chestnut were dying, I would say that most of them were already dead, and this was a disaster, you see all of these beautiful old dried trees, they don't rot and fall down because it was very resistant to decay, and
I'd gotten interested in the disease and had done some reading about this and I guess I'd, maybe I'd taken a course in forest pathology.
I don't think, I don't think I'd taken it yet, but at least I'd done some reading and this disturbed me no end.
Why we weren't spending more effort
more money on.
Here is a disease wiping out a complete species.
It so happens that today I'm indirectly involved with Dave French, who's the head of this and the head of plant pathology at Minnesota.
He was trained in forest pathology.
and he and Charlie Burnham who was the cytogeneticist on corn until he retired about 10 years ago, they started the Little Chestnut Foundation and there's a couple of nurserymen in southern Minnesota that joined into this and now nearly a
80 years after the problem should have been attacked, we're going at this thing again, and I'm indirectly involved, I don't have time to do much, but the person that I was talking to a minute ago is interested in this also.
Warehouse is getting a little interested, but you see,
This kind of thing always has bugged me and worried me about how we don't spend money wisely.
We don't start programs that are obviously needed soon enough.
We wait until the disaster is well advanced.
Chestnut or chestnut blight was not the only one.
That's young diseases exhibit A and today.
Same mistakes.
Is that because of human behavior or is it because of our free market economy or is it because the way our government works?
Why do you think that is?
Well I suppose in forestry it's much more difficult because you have to have continuity of funding for breeding forestries for at least 20 years.
Whereas in breeding a rust-resistant or disease-resistant variety of wheat, you can get this done with the techniques that we were instrumental in working with two generations a year or three.
You can get a concrete positive impact in five years.
But in trees... Which is nice for a funding organization.
That's right, for a funding standpoint.
But the Congress...
looked at these appropriations every couple of years.
You know how that goes on the forestry thing, and forestry is under the eight ball because of that.
And then in recent years, I'm sorry I'm wandering off here, but I think there's some pertinent principles involved.
The Forest Service or administrators of public lands, I think the state Forest Services are probably in the same situation.
with all of the environmentalist movement.
There are certain extremists who are involved, and they may not be the majority by any means, but they're heard.
They're heard in the popular press, television, and radio, and they exert a disproportionate influence to the number that they are.
issues that to me are important to management of our forest over the long pull.
The result was that, I guess it was in 1975, when I was invited to attend forest genetics meeting, that time it happened to be in Coeur d'Alene, Idaho, this international meeting, UFRA, Union of
international forest tree breeders or whatever it is, and following this meeting, and it was an excellent meeting, I got loud out of it, I was a closing speaker, and again here's where you'll get a payoff across different crops and disciplines.
For the first, this was where
There was a lot of work being reported on breeding for blister rust, soft pines.
Is this what we have up in Yellowstone?
Yes, on the soft pines it's all through the west.
And it turns them brown?
It kills them gradually over time, the susceptible ones.
And this was something that had always fascinated me because this was an introduced disease also.
You see, the chestnut blight was introduced from Asia.
there are recessing chestnuts in Asia and had we gone about it right and crossed them and recrossed them, selected them, we'd have a tree that looked like the American chestnut resistant.
We didn't do it.
The same story on Dutch Young disease.
The resistance is always, there's co-evolution of the pathogen and the host in the zones of origin, but apparently both the chestnut
American chestnut and American elm evolved on the American continent away from contact with this passenger.
They had never seen it before.
And when it came in, rubbed them all out.
They were all susceptible.
There's no exception.
But in the case of white pine, over a period of
Twenty years before this meeting, that was in 68, I believe, that I was at Gord Lane.
Dick Bingham, who was a forest geneticist out in Moscow, Idaho, got interested in this problem, and it had been worked on at the University of Wisconsin and several other places.
But the problem, the disease is much worse in the Inland Empire.
Western white pine, especially in those areas where you have a lot of fog and high humidity, the best stands of western white pine were demolished.
But Dick Pingham would see an occasional tree, I've forgotten what it was, one in 20,000 or some such thing, that didn't die.
Some of them were more resistant of those that didn't die.
than others, and he collected these and he started making a few crosses.
This was 20 or more years before that 68, and so he had demonstrated that some of these were highly promising, and he was reporting on this, and then there were, during those days, there were a lot of short papers that were being presented.
And one after another, young forest pathologist would get up and say, I have found a gene for resistance in pinus flexless, limber pine, high elevation pine, soft pine.
Somebody else, I've found a gene for resistance in sugar pine.
And one of the other western soft pines
not of economic importance, but these were being reported.
And of course, previously out in Wisconsin they had been working on this rust, and they had reported resistance in northern white pine, one that we have out in the Midwest and out in New England, where the disease isn't so severe.
And as I listened to this and they were discussing, I was supposed to be the speaker on Friday, by about late Tuesday afternoon I couldn't, I couldn't detain myself any longer and I said, pardon me for interrupting but I think this is a point that needs to be
discussed at this point, and all of the data has recently been presented, or three days from now we won't get the right focus on it.
And I said, you are dealing with fossil genes, but they're fossil only in the sense of their oldness in the genus Pinus, the soft pines of North America.
What this means to me
I surmise from my knowledge of what happened with corn rust in Africa.
Corn was introduced into West Africa, probably on empty slave ships going back in the 1500s.
They took corn back and it became a basic subsistence crop.
The earliest records indicates that corn rust was present there early, but it was not of any importance.
But in 1948, or thereabouts, there was a disastrous explosion of corn rust and famine.
And by then, this was after the war, they started bringing in foreign experts,
and testing materials, they found lots of resistance from Mexico, the Caribbean area, and the new corns that were introduced, but they didn't fit from the standpoint of productivity when they started crossing, but before they could get a new variety out, that little peasant farmer, he solved the problem.
He had
And these scientists found that, I should have pointed out, that there are two corn rusts in the zones of origin of corn, Mexico, for example.
At the lower elevation, there's one that the repeating spores are sort of quadrangular.
And the one at higher elevation, lower temperature organism, is like an American football, readily distinguishable.
Pustules look the same.
The spores look different.
And the rust that they found in the old herbaria were all of that high temperature or high elevation, low temperature.
And so it never became a problem.
The one that blew up was the one that fit that hot climate.
And it came from the low elevations.
And almost certainly had been introduced on roasting years or something like this.
Maybe, who knows, out of an airplane in a dump.
in a way, exploded, demolished everything.
But that little person, farmer, he apparently had saved the best few years that weren't completely destroyed and replanted them.
After he did this a couple of times, it was resistant.
And I knew about this.
The foresters didn't know about this.
So I said, you're dealing with fossil genes.
Fossil, not in the sense that they're not functional,
These genes are at a low frequency in these American pine populations.
The resistance, just as in the case of chestnut light, the case of Dutch elm disease, is in Asia.
Eastern Asian pines are known to be resistant to a blister rust, Brunarchium ribiculum, Pinus seboricus,
there's a whole series, and I said some time or other during one of the ice ages, and this has happened three or four times, when the ice was piled high on the continents and the Beringa Bridge was up, which covers three or four hundred miles in width and connected with Asia, there must have been pines growing all across these, and when these went down
our pine end, this rust was also present in the populations of pine in the Americas, Alaska, British Columbia.
What did the foresters say to this?
They sat there like this.
They thought I was crazy at the beginning.
I'm sorry I'm taking so long, but it's interesting from a pure scientific standpoint.
And so I said, the very fact that
The genes for resistance are at a higher frequency here in Pinus manticula, and maybe in some of these species you've reported on today, than they are in northern white pine, eastern white pine.
Indicates that this has been the gene flow.
And when you don't have selection pressure of the disease on populations,
then that gene is of no importance and so it'll be static and it'll probably, if it's connected to something that's related to survival, it'll be sloughed off negatively.
But otherwise it'll just be floating.
But here, it was killed off.
by something in the ice age.
The land bridge went down, we've got our pines, they've got theirs, the resistance is over there until Dick Bingham found it here and now you young people are reporting their genes here also.
I say this is evidence that they were all connected.
And those genes are part of that complex that are at a much higher frequency in Asia.
And Dick Bingham, who is a good friend of mine, he says, crazy.
And so then I explained to him about this corn thing that I explained first.
But no one was convinced.
The meeting, I gave the talk the last day, and I left to go back to Mexico.
A month later, I got a note from him.
He says, damn you, Norm.
He said, you upset us, and we went back through all the literature, and we found a little note going back about seven or eight years ago in the Russian literature that they had found in the permafrost twigs and needles intact of a soft white pine that's probably indistinguishable from western white pine.
and it's 50 miles in from tidewater.
I mean, there's no proof, but it's pretty good circumstantial evidence that this is so.
And so you see this forestry thing, it's a hobby for me now, but it's important because forests and land use, especially in irrigated agriculture, it's all related.
And as a matter of fact, when I
retired from the directorship of the Simic Wheat Program in 79 and my longtime associate Glenn Anderson took over.
I had worked out arrangements where I was going to spend at least one month or six weeks a year working with Weyerhaeuser in their forest breeding program.
It didn't work out very well after the first year.
A little later,
Dr. Anderson died like this after being sick for only five days, acute leukemia, and so I had to go back in the saddle again, so I've never had a chance to really work forestry again, but I still have that big interest.
And the Forest Service, I mentioned New England, part of my work crew there were CCC boys.
Let's talk about the CCC.
And I lived in the CC camp part of the year, and at another time I had WPA crews.
These were older men who were unemployed that worked on those forestry crews also.
The CCC, I think, was one of the really good programs for that period.
Did a lot of good.
It salvaged young people from the slum areas that were poverty-stricken.
I saw them change from demoralized youth when they came, this was out in New England mostly, mostly poor kids from the slums of Boston come in, and at that time, I don't know whether you're familiar with this or not, but the army ran the camps, barracks, just military barracks, oh is that right, and the mess.
And we foresters or soil conservation, depending on what the program was, we would take the crews out at seven o'clock in the morning from the time they left camp until when they came back at five, they were under our control, the work program, whatever it was, planting trees, building trails, fire breaks, or whatnot.
I was back in New England the second time.
also under an emergency program where this was after the CC had shut down, but they picked it up after that, but the army wasn't involved then.
It was right before we became embroiled in World War
when there was a big hurricane that went through New England and blew down a tremendous lot of timber, and the Forest Service was assigned the job of helping the states to salvage that.
They set up camps pretty much the same, but they were civilian-run, but the basic thing was similar.
But the CCC was excellent because we lived and worked there with the military.
We never had any, or at least I never had any friction.
lived right next to the second lieutenants, mostly that ran the camp.
Once in a while it was the first lieutenant, but mostly second lieutenants.
Were you on the CCC payroll?
No.
Who funded your position?
Forest Service.
Okay, Forest Service.
And depending on the camp, you got a different insight into the politics of the thing.
Some of them were interior camps, Department of the Interior, and some were the agriculture.
Once in the agriculture, the political thing
I think probably because the Forest Service was the, the funds must have come through the Forest Service.
I was too young to understand all of this, but in a way they, I remember once vividly, there were two camps in Massachusetts, one not too far from one another, and I knew some of the people in both.
I was over one night at the interior camp where I had been stationed
because I got work crews out of there at one time.